[Doc] Introduction to module serialization (#4564)
apache/incubator-tvm: docs/dev/introduction_to_module_serialization.rst

..  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

..  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Introduction to Module Serialization
====================================

> **Author**: `Zhao Wu <https://github.com/FrozenGene>`_

Reviewer: Given that this is part of doc as opposed to tutorial, let us not include author's name for now(to be consistent with the rest part of the doc) as we want to encourage future collaborations and improvements. Of course the contribution is part of the git commit history :)

Author: Done.

..  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

..  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Introduction to Module Serialization
====================================

> When to deploy TVM runtime module, no matter it is CPU or GPU, TVM only needs one single DLL.

Reviewer 2: no matter "whether" it is CPU or GPU

The key is our unified module serialization mechanism. This document will introduce TVM module
serialization format standard and implementation details.

> ***************************************

Reviewer 3: Align *

Module Export Example
***************************************

> Let us build one resnet18 workload for GPU as our example firstly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, let us build one ResNet-18 workload for GPU as our example.
```

.. code:: python

   from tvm import relay
   from tvm.relay import testing
   from tvm.contrib import util
   import tvm

   # Resnet18 workload
   resnet18_mod, resnet18_params = relay.testing.resnet.get_workload(num_layers=18)

   # build
   with relay.build_config(opt_level=3):
       _, resnet18_lib, _ = relay.build_module.build(resnet18_mod, "cuda", params=resnet18_params)

   # create one tempory directory
   temp = util.tempdir()

   # path lib
   file_name = "deploy.so"
   path_lib = temp.relpath(file_name)

   # export library
   resnet18_lib.export_library(path_lib)

   # load it back
   loaded_lib = tvm.module.load(path_lib)
   assert loaded_lib.type_key == "library"
   assert loaded_lib.imported_modules[0].type_key == "cuda"

> 

Reviewer 3: Remove extra blank line

**************
Serialization
**************

The entrance API is ``export_library`` of ``tvm.module.Module``.
Inside this function, we will do the following steps:

> 1. Collect all DSO modules (LLVM module or C module)

Reviewer 3: Should be "llvm modules and C modules", and C source module is actually not a DSO module, we need to invoke compilation later to link them together with the DSO module.

> 

Reviewer 3: remove extra blank line

> 2. If we have DSO modules, we will call ``save`` function to save them into files.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Once we have DSO modules, we will call ``save`` function to save them into files.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: remove extra blank line

> 3. Next, we will check whether we have imported modules. Like CUDA,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Next, we will check whether we have imported modules, such as CUDA,
```

>    OpenCL or anything else, we don't restrict the module type here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   OpenCL or anything else. We don't restrict the module type here.
```

   If we have imported modules, we will create one file named as ``dev.cc``

>    (so that we could compile into one dll), then call one function

Reviewer 4: If -> Once
not very clear to me how "creating dev.cc" and "compile into one dll" are related. mind elaborate a bit more?

Author: The better description maybe should be (so that we could embed the binary blob data of import modules into one dll). For example, CUDA module, we will have one function named as SaveToBinary, we will use it to serialize related data of CUDA module (like function information table, binary data and so on) into binary. Then we will translate the binary blob data in C program `const char __tvm_dev_blob[] = {0x...0x...0x...}`, finally we will write this into dev.cc, which will be compiled into shared library by compiler (using -fPIC -shared).

   ``_PackImportsToC`` to do module serialization.

4. Finally, we use ``fcompile`` to call ``_cc.create_shared`` to get

>    dll.

Reviewer 3: .dll for Windows or .so for Linux

***************************************************
Under the Hood of Serialization and Format Standard
***************************************************

As said before, we will do the serialization work in ``_PackImportsToC``.
Inside this function, we firstly construct one helper class ``ModuleSerializer``.

> It will take ``module`` to do some initialize work, like marking module index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It will take ``module`` to do some initialization work, like marking module index.
```

Then we could use its ``SerializeModule`` to serialize module.

> For the sake of understanding better, let us dig the implementation of this class a little deeper.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For better understanding, let us dig the implementation of this class a little deeper.
```

> When we construct ``ModuleSerializer``, we could see this code:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following code is used to construct ``ModuleSerializer``:
```

.. code:: c++

   explicit ModuleSerializer(runtime::Module mod) : mod_(mod) {
     Init();
   }
   private:
   void Init() {
     CreateModuleIndex();
     CreateImportTree();
   }

In ``CreateModuleIndex()``, We will inspect module import relationship

> using DFS and create index for them. Here, we have one invariance: root

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
using DFS and create index for them. Note the root
```

> module is always at location 0. In our example, we have module relationship:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
module is fixed at location 0. In our example, we have module relationship:
```

``LLVM Module <- CUDA Module.`` So LLVM module will have index 0, CUDA
module will have index 1.

After constructing module index, we will try to construct import tree (``CreateImportTree()``),

> which will be used for restore module import relationship when we load

Reviewer 2: "for restore" ==> "to restore"

the exported library back. In our design, we use CSR format to store

> import tree, each row is parent index, the child indices is its children

Reviewer 2: the child indices "is" ==> the child "corresponds to"

Reviewer 3: correspond

index. In code, we use ``import_tree_row_ptr_`` and
``import_tree_child_indices_`` to represent them.

After initialization, we could serialize module using ``SerializeModule`` function.
In its function logic, we will assume the serialization format like this:

.. code:: c++

   binary_blob_size
   binary_blob_type_key
   binary_blob_logic
   ...
   _import_tree
   _import_tree_logic

> ``binary_blob_size`` is how many blobs we will have in this

Reviewer 2: Maybe a diagram or figure could help elaborate this section more clearly.

serialization step. In our example, the number will equal to 3. One for

> LLVM module, one for CUDA module, one for ``_import_tree``.

Reviewer 2: It looks that "_import_tree" is a meta data, so just a little bit curious why it also occupies another slot as the imported modules(LLVM/CUDA).

Author: Firstly, when we load it back, we will do the follow logic: ```cpp for(int i= 0; i < binary_blob_size; ++i) { Read(key); do something for this key(like call module.loadbinary_tkey or read _import_tree_row_ptr / _import_tree_child_indices) }``` . So if we don’t have one slot for _import_tree (i.e. don’t keep the same blob layout as before) ,we can not read it back smoothly. So, you could imagine we have one module, whose type key is _import_tree, its serialization logic is to save _import_tree_row_ptr / _import_tree_child_indices.  Secondly, _import_tree will indicate our library (deploy.so) is using new export mechanism and we could use _import_tree to reconstruct import relationship. If we don’t have this key, we will fallback to old behavior. This design could make us keep backward compatible. That is to say, in the new runtime system, your old exported library could work perfectly too. Does it make sense to you?

Then we will write the ``binary_blob_type_key``, for LLVM module / C
module, the blob type key is ``_lib``. For CUDA module, it is

> ``cuda``, which could get using ``module->type_key()``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``cuda``, which can be got by ``module->type_key()``.
```

Next we will do the ``binary_blob_logic``. Normally, we will call
``SaveToBinary`` function to serialize blob into binary. So, for most
modules, they should implement ``SaveToBinary`` function. But like DSO

> module, we don't implement ``SaveToBinary``, we also don't some special

Reviewer 3: We probably want to elaborate a bit about when users need to implement SaveToBinary. It is mainly implemented for device modules not for the host module such as DSO

handling, so the ``binary_blob_logic`` for DSO module currently
is empty in fact.

Finally, we will write one key ``_import_tree``. Unless our module only

> have one DSO module and it is in the root, otherwise we will always

Reviewer 2: "have"==>"has"

> have this key. It is used for reconstruct the module import relationship

Reviewer 2: "for reconstruct"==>"to reconstruct"

when we load the exported library back as said before. The

> ``import_tree_logic`` is just write ``import_tree_row_ptr_`` and

Reviewer 2: "is just write" ==>"just writes"

``import_tree_child_indices_`` into stream.

After this step, we will pack it into a symbol
``runtime::symbol::tvm_dev_mblob`` that can be recovered in the dynamic
libary.

Now, we complete the serialization part. As you have seen, we could
support arbitrary modules to import ideally.

****************
Deserialization
****************

The entrance API is ``tvm.module.load``. This function
is to call ``_LoadFromFile`` in fact. If we dig it a little deeper, this is
``Module::LoadFromFile``. In our example, the file ``deploy.so``,
according to the function logic, we will call ``module.loadfile_so`` in
``dso_library.cc``. The key is here:

.. code:: c++

   // Load the imported modules
   const char* dev_mblob = reinterpret_cast<const char*>(lib->GetSymbol(runtime::symbol::tvm_dev_mblob));
   Module root_mod;
   if (dev_mblob != nullptr) {
   root_mod = ProcessModuleBlob(dev_mblob, lib);
   } else {
   // Only have one single DSO Module
   root_mod = Module(n);
   }

As said before, we will pack the blob into the symbol
``runtime::symbol::tvm_dev_mblob``. During deserialization part, we will

> inspect it. If we have it, we will call ``ProcessModuleBlob``, whose logic like this:

Reviewer 4: do you mean "if we have the properly serialized blob" ?

Author: I mean "if we have symbol of runtime::symbol::tvm_dev_mblob"

    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

..  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Introduction to Module Serialization
====================================

When to deploy TVM runtime module, no matter whether it is CPU or GPU, TVM only needs one single DLL.
The key is our unified module serialization mechanism. This document will introduce TVM module
serialization format standard and implementation details.

*********************
Module Export Example
*********************

> Firstly, Let us build one ResNet-18 workload for GPU as our example firstly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let us build one ResNet-18 workload for GPU as an example first.
```

.. code:: python

   from tvm import relay
   from tvm.relay import testing
   from tvm.contrib import util
   import tvm

   # Resnet18 workload
   resnet18_mod, resnet18_params = relay.testing.resnet.get_workload(num_layers=18)

   # build
   with relay.build_config(opt_level=3):
       _, resnet18_lib, _ = relay.build_module.build(resnet18_mod, "cuda", params=resnet18_params)

   # create one tempory directory
   temp = util.tempdir()

   # path lib
   file_name = "deploy.so"
   path_lib = temp.relpath(file_name)

   # export library
   resnet18_lib.export_library(path_lib)

   # load it back
   loaded_lib = tvm.module.load(path_lib)
   assert loaded_lib.type_key == "library"
   assert loaded_lib.imported_modules[0].type_key == "cuda"

*************
Serialization
*************

The entrance API is ``export_library`` of ``tvm.module.Module``.
Inside this function, we will do the following steps:

1. Collect all DSO modules (LLVM modules and C modules)

2. Once we have DSO modules, we will call ``save`` function to save them into files.

3. Next, we will check whether we have imported modules, such as CUDA,
   OpenCL or anything else. We don't restrict the module type here.

>    Once we have imported modules, we will create one file named as ``dev.cc``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Once we have imported modules, we will create one file named ``dev.cc``
```

   (so that we could embed the binary blob data of import modules into one dynamic shared library),
   then call function ``_PackImportsToLLVM`` or ``_PackImportsToC`` to do module serialization.

> 4. Finally, we use ``fcompile`` to call ``_cc.create_shared`` to get

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Finally, we call ``fcompile`` which invokes ``_cc.create_shared`` to get
```

   dynamic shared library.

.. note::
    1. For C source modules, we will compile them and link them together with the DSO module.

    2. Use ``_PackImportsToLLVM`` or ``_PackImportsToC`` depends on whether we enable LLVM in TVM.
       They achieve the same goal in fact.

***************************************************
Under the Hood of Serialization and Format Standard
***************************************************

As said before, we will do the serialization work in the ``_PackImportsToLLVM`` or ``_PackImportsToC``.

> They will call one same function ``SerializeModule`` to do module serialization. In ``SerializeModule``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They both call ``SerializeModule`` to serialize the runtime module. In ``SerializeModule``
```

     Init();
   }
   private:
   void Init() {
     CreateModuleIndex();
     CreateImportTree();
   }

In ``CreateModuleIndex()``, We will inspect module import relationship
using DFS and create index for them. Note the root module is fixed at
location 0. In our example, we have module relationship like this:

.. code:: c++

  llvm_mod:imported_modules
    - cuda_mod

So LLVM module will have index 0, CUDA module will have index 1.

After constructing module index, we will try to construct import tree (``CreateImportTree()``),
which will be used to restore module import relationship when we load
the exported library back. In our design, we use CSR format to store
import tree, each row is parent index, the child indices correspond to its children
index. In code, we use ``import_tree_row_ptr_`` and
``import_tree_child_indices_`` to represent them.

After initialization, we could serialize module using ``SerializeModule`` function.
In its function logic, we will assume the serialization format like this:

.. code:: c++

   binary_blob_size
   binary_blob_type_key
   binary_blob_logic
   binary_blob_type_key
   binary_blob_logic
   ...
   _import_tree
   _import_tree_logic

> ``binary_blob_size`` is how many blobs we will have in this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``binary_blob_size`` is the number of blobs we will have in this
```

> serialization step. In our example, the number will equal to 3. One for

Reviewer 3: There will be three blobs in our example which are created for LLVM module, CUDA module, and ``_import_tree``, respectively.

LLVM module, one for CUDA module, one for ``_import_tree``.

> Then we will write the ``binary_blob_type_key``, for LLVM module / C

Reviewer 3: This sentence seems broken as well.

module, the blob type key is ``_lib``. For CUDA module, it is
``cuda``, which could be got by ``module->type_key()``.

> Next we will do the ``binary_blob_logic``. Normally, we will call

Reviewer 3: I don't quite get this. Do you mean "Next, we work on the serialization of the binary blob"?

Reviewer 3: oaky, so can rephrase it?

Author: Yes. I will rephrase it next.

``SaveToBinary`` function to serialize blob into binary.

.. note::

>    When to implement ``SaveToBinary``, it depends on circumstances.

Reviewer 3: Whether or not it is required to implement the ``SaveToBinary`` virtual function depends on how the module is used. For example, there are some typical cases as following.
